# Known Zesk Build Artifacts

These are files which are generated by Zesk Build for various purposes.

<!-- TEMPLATE guideHeader 2 -->
[🛠️ Guide](./index.md) &middot; [⬅ Home ](../index.md)
<hr />

## `.build/` Directory

A `.build/` directory is created at a configured location set by the environment variable `BUILD_CACHE`. If not set, it
uses `XDG_CACHE_HOME` directory, which defaults to a standard directory.

You can preserve the build directory post-build to see any details. Most failures will still output the log, but they
will not be output to your primary build log unless a failure occurs.

## `.deploy/` Directory

A top-level `.deploy` directory is created for build steps and contains metadata about the deployment. This is always
created in the project root and the expectation is that it will be included in any deployments as metadata (not
required, however).

## `.build.env`

A docker-compatible `.env` file which is:

- Generated by `phpBuild`
- Used by `deployBuildEnvironment` if present
- Zesk Build generates for own build (by `bin/build.sh`)

## `.deprecated`

Log of deprecated calls made and their stacks. This file will grow infinitely and is intended to annoy you.

Remove these calls ASAP. One run of `bin/build/deprecated.sh` on your code will likely fix it. See [
`_deprecated`](../tools/sugar.md#_deprecated)

## `.interrupt.log`

Product of [bashDebugInterruptFile](../tools/debug.md#bashdebuginterruptfile) and the process receiving an INT or ERR
signal.

## `.test.state`

Someone ran `testSuite --debug`. This is for debugging `testSuite` test state. Delete it freely. See [
`testSuite --debug`](../tools/test.md#testsuite) This file is an environment file used to pass state to hooks.
