# Zesk Build release v0.41.0

> Copyright &copy; 2026 Market Acumen, Inc.

- Previous version: v0.40.3

`validate` updated in code everywhere. Any functions which look like `usageArgumentFoo` are now deprecated.

Sped up the template documentation which in general speeds up the build process, hopefully. New phase of build now
includes building the help cache, now stored in `./bin/build/documentation/functionName.sh` for function settings.

Also test finding and searching is cached and faster in a test file located at `./test/tests.index` which is generated as part of the commit.

Made an effort this release to rename deprecated functions whose prefixes (e.g. `insideDocker` -> `dockerInside`) do not
match their related module. So a lot has changed used `deprecated.sh` to upgrade your scripts.

`testTools` is now deprecated and all test and assertions functions are dynamically loaded as needed - so they are now
universally available.

`isExecutable` now uses `which` as it was returning true for all `isCallable` and no easy way to disambiguate.

## `testSuite` output formats

`testSuite` now outputs three formats: junit, tap, and a statistics output showing test timings (--stats), all are written using hooks.

## `bashDebugInterruptFile` sample output

`bashDebugInterruptFile` now outputs an error to `stderr` so it's clear that it's working. Errors look like:

    user@host ~/dev/build > CI=1 bin/tools.sh buildDocumentationExtractionUpdate --quick
    #1/631 - alignLeft 0.273 seconds
    #2/631 - alignRight 0.263 seconds
    ^C
    +=================+=====+
    | DEBUG INTERRUPT | 130 |
    +=================+=====+

## Validate changes

- `validate` is the new `usageArgument` and is in use universally

## Deprecations and Renamed Functions (old functions are deprecated)

- Removed `BUILD_COLORS_MODE` and added `consoleConfigureDecorate` as a
  substitute ([Hey, look at when it was added!](./v0.7.6.md))
- `markdownFormatList` should output fewer stray blank list entries
- `alignRight` -> `textAlignRight`
- `alignLeft` -> `textAlignLeft`
- `cachedShaPipe` -> `shaPipe --cache cacheDirectory`
- `debugOpenFiles` -> `filesOpenStatus`
- `findUncaughtAssertions` -> `bashFindUncaughtAssertions`
- `hasColors` -> `consoleHasColors`
- `hasConsoleAnimation` -> `consoleHasAnimation`
- `insideDocker` -> `dockerInside`
- `isAbsolutePath` -> `pathIsAbsolute`
- `makeShellFilesExecutable` -> `bashMakeExecutable`
- `beginsWith` was removed, use `stringBegins` (it's the same function)
- `echoBar` -> `consoleLine`
- `yesterdayDate` -> `dateYesterday`
- `todayDate` -> `dateToday`
- `tomorrowDate` -> `dateTomorrow`
- `extensionLists` -> `fileExtensionLists`
- `whichHook` -> `hookFind`
- `whichExists` -> `executableExists`
- `repeat` -> `textRepeat` ** NOT ADDED TO DEPRECATED PROCESSING DUE TO WORD USAGE AS COMMON **
- `lineFill` -> `consoleHeadingLine`
- `boxedHeading` -> `consoleHeadingBoxed`
- `environmentAddFile` -> `buildEnvironmentAdd`
- `lineFill` -> `consoleHeadingLine`
- `plainLength` -> `consolePlainLength`
- `mapReturn` -> `returnMap`
- `maximumFieldLength` -> `fileFieldMaximum`
- `maximumLineLength` -> `fileLineMaximum`
- `stripAnsi` -> `consoleToPlain`

- Added deprecated updates (to mapping file) to `catchReturn` for internal functions (
  `catchEnvironment "$handler" any` -> `catchReturn "$handler" any`)
- All functions `usageArgument...` are deprecated and will be replaced by the deprecated binary - if you wish to keep
  using these, include `bin/build/tools/usage-deprecated.sh` to temporarily keep access to these. They will be removed
  in a future release.
- Removed all references to `# Usage:` in functions - the argument definition tends to be more accurate
- Abandoned `buildFastFiles` and `sugar-fast.sh` - too soon to optimize this
- `BUILD_COVERAGE_REQUIRED_DATE` has passed and so it has been removed

## Bug fixes

- Removed `backgroundProcess` from core `bin/developer.sh` - need to test better for longer/slower processes
- `pathConfigure` and `pathRemove` now sanitize directory names to remove trailing slashes, helps avoid duplicates
- Fixed `buildEnvironmentNames` and misspelled template variable `GASH_SOURCE`
- Fixed a bug in `listAppend` when adding strings whose ends match - would be a no-op
- Added `--debug` flag to `pipWrapper` to hide debugging

## New Features

- Added `timingElapsed`
- Added `consoleConfigureDecorate`
- Added `shfmt` to pre-commit hook for bash (only if installed)
- Added some optimizations to `reloadChanges` prompt module to make it less slow
- Added `--version` to `_installRemotePackage` to enable fixed version installations for live stable environments
- Updated semantics of `version-function` and `url-function` in `_installRemotePath` to support new passed in requested
  version. Blank if latest is requested.
- Changed `which` usage to `command -v` but `command -v` caches binaries which have moved, so updated `executableExists`
  to
  check path and existence. `shopt -u checkhash` may fix this but do not want to worry about save/restore.
- `bin/build/install-bin-build.sh --version v0.40.3` now works with the `v0.41.0` installer and greater
- `_installRemotePackage` supports usage via a pipe (remote install) and avoids writing a file called `main` in this
  case
- Added `decorateInitialized` to better support correct setup for tools which configure their color mode
- `bashDocumentationExtract` now requires `sourceFile` and supports cached values in builds in the
  `bin/build/documentation/` directory with new flags.
- Fixed the ordering of most documentation arguments so it's now: `Type. Required.` `Type. Optional.`
- Added cached documentation to `bin/build/documentation` to speed this up as it never changes each build
    - See internal {SEE:buildUsageCompile}
- `buildUsageCompile` optimizations
- Added some profiling tools in the identical directory: `profileFunctionHead` `profileFunctionMarker`
  `profileFunctionMarkerOthers` and `profileFunctionTail` - expects two local variables `$flag` and `$flags` to trigger
  the profiler
- Fixed an issue in `consoleLineFill`; had a bug where it would prevent exiting if the internal function was interrupted
- Moved `daemontools` service template files into `bin/build/identical` to keep code space `bin/build/tools` clean of
  non-running code
- Console output is now cached in `bin/build/documentation` for help files
- `BUILD_DEBUG` for `usage-profile` added to speed up `usageDocument`
- Changed the semantic of `--token` in `identicalCheck` - you can now pass tokens as arguments without the `--token`
- `bashSanitize` now uses ignore paths for `debugging` check exclusion as well
- Looked at building all of Zesk Build into a single `.sh` file for core source with supporting code loaded to see if it
  speeds up the load time.
- Reorganized the decoration functions internally to separate different concerns in the code
- `decorate each` now supports a `CommaDelimitedList` for style, so `decorate each BOLD,blue` works. `style` is expanded
  into command line arguments to each style command separated by commas.
- Removed `applicationFile` from function source extraction, added `sourceHash` to hopefully avoid regeneration of
  compiled usage templates when modification dates change
- `--value` can be blank for `buildEnvironmentAdd`
- `characterClasses` now supports taking a character argument, and `characterClassReport` is now much faster
- `assert` functions now available without calling `testTools` and `testTools` is deprecated; now uses the same loading
  mechanism as the rest of Zesk Build `__testLoader` for the internal nerd.
- `outputTrigger` now outputs the file as-is, and without `--verbose` does not output an error
- `bashSanitize` is much better about filtering files
- `source` `declare` and `echo` now return 0 when passed to `isExecutable`
- `isExecutable` now uses `which` instead of `command -v` due to issues identifying binaries vs. functions
- Within a hook call the environment variable `HOOK_NAME` is set to the current hook code name, so `HOOK_NAME=test-fail`
  when the script `bin/hooks/test-fail.sh` is run, for example. This makes it easier to run `--next` hooks without
  copy/paste errors.
- Internally, `__functionLoader` now excludes `hooks` directories to allow us to add in hooks for `junit` and `tap` test
  error handling, etc. Basically any directory in `bin/build/tools` which is named `hooks` is ignored when loaded as a
  subdirectory during dynamic code loading. Not super important to most but just noted here for posterity.
- `testSuite` now supports `junit` output as well as running tests after failures
- Using `IDENTICAL hookRunOptionalNext`
- Added `muzzleReturn` utility
- Added `printfOutputEmpty` utility
- Heyyyyy ... `diff` returns non-zero when files do not match so when outputting differences make sure to catch that
  error code. Wink. Maybe add a utility for this as `diff` differs between platforms. (GNU vs. non-GNU I assume.)
- Updated all occurrences of `diff` and `diff -u` and replaced with new `filesAreIdentical` where appropriate; otherwise
  standardize on `diff -U0` for most diffs and `diff -U3` for showing context. (May change.)
- Assertion counts are now output
- Semantics of `decorate each code a b c -- d` and `decorate quote -- --` now work properly.
- Adding `--index-file` to `buildTestSuite` to speed up tests
- `testSuite` run cleanup was improved (deletes temp files), and error output to test failures should be more verbose.
- `__usageDocumentCached` was not outputting error messages, it now does
- Split off `__usageMessage` and `__usageMessageStyle` for usage outputs
